---
Title: Testing
---

# Testing

__Testing__ is **executing** all or part of a program's code in a 
**controlled manner** for the purpose of **finding defects**.

In this unit, we will start our deep dive into Testing. We will start
by discussing what we mean by testing. In the next module, we'll
discuss different types of testing. And then, in the remaining units
we will focus on writing JUnit tests in Java.

## Purpose

What is the primary purpose of testing?

**TO FIND DEFECTS**.

This is the mindset you should have! You should always assume your code has bugs,
because it probably does. And having this mindset will change how you test.

If you approach testing with the mindset "I'm checking if my code works", you will
almost certainly test too little, and not find the one defect that's going to make
your code crash when graded. If you are trying to prove your code works, you're
going to setup the best possible scenario with your code, with ideal inputs, and
check for ideal outputs. And then you'll be satisfied.

But if this mindset were used everywhere, crash safety ratings from IIHS would be
useless. They don't delicately bump into a car with a small tricycle at slow speeds
to test a car's safety. They do this:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/n8vf9EJBBfw?start=24" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

They ram the car at high speeds into the wall. They don't just test with dopplegangers
for adult passengers, they use child sized dummies in car seats, because they
want to test that too. Then, they hit the car in the side. Then they launch the
car into a pole for a driver side impact. Then they hit the car in the back. Then they
roll the car over. They *destroy* these cars in worst possible incidents.

This is your mindset when testing. I want to torture-test this code, and try to
find it's weakest points in extreme situations, because that's where most bugs hide.

## Need for testing

> "But I know my code work!"  
> -Student whose code doesn't work (c. 2022)

Consider the following code for a function that takes in two numbers and tells you
which is larger.

```java
    public int max(int a, int b) {
        if (a > b) {
            return a;
        } else {
            return b;
        }
    }   
```

Does this code have any bugs? You may confidently say no, but now let's *slightly*
complicate this code. Now, let's take in three numbers.

```java
    public int max(int a, int b, int c) {
        if (a > b) {
            if (a > c) return a;
            else return c;
        } else {
            if (b > c) return b;
            else return a;
        }
    }
```

Are there any bugs in this code? Really take time to be confident
in your opinion before moving on.

---

Did you find a bug? How long did it take you to find it? How would
you fix it? How confident are you that your solution *will* fix it?

There is a bug in this code, namely the last `else` statement

```else return a;```

Should instead be

```else return c;```

---

Okay, now let's go back to two numbers:

```java
    public int max(int a, int b) {
        return a + b + (int) (Math.abs(a - b) / 2);
    }
```

Does this method work? This may seem weird to ask. This method doesn't have
any if statements, you say. How could this work? Well, it turns out this does
work!...most of the time. But how can you tell? Well, we design some testing
scenarios.

## Scenario

A testing scenario is where you create a controlled scenario with specifically
defined inputs and expected behaviors. The test is then executed and the
actual results are measured and compared to the expected result.

__A test passes__ when the expected and actual results match
__A test fails__ when the expected and actual results do not match

### Input

### Expected Output

### Actual Output

## What testing doesn't do
