---
Title: Mockito
---


# [Mockito](https://site.mockito.org/)

In our last unit, we talked about using Stub classes for testing. However, stub classes require a lot of extra code to create, and if we want to create multiple test cases, we would need to create multiple stub classes. This approach therefore is clunky and heavy-weight.

Enter [`mockito`](https://site.mockito.org/), a framework for improving unit testing. Mockito a can support "on the fly" stubbing within the test. In this module, we will look at example uses, as well as show some features for mockito.

---

* TOC
{:toc}

---

## Mockito usage example

Here is [`GoodAbbreviationsTest`](https://github.com/sde-coursepack/NBAExcelTeams/blob/main/src/test/java/edu/virginia/cs/nbateams/GoodAbbreviationsTest.java), but using mockito rather than a mock class.


```java
package edu.virginia.cs.nbateams;

import org.junit.jupiter.api.*;
import java.util.*;

import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;
import static org.mockito.Mockito.*;

public class GoodAbbreviationsTest {
    private NBATeamReader reader;

    private static NBATeam LAKERS, CELTICS;

    @BeforeAll
    public static void init() {
        LAKERS = new NBATeam(1,"Lakers","Los Angelos","LAL",
                Conference.WESTERN, Division.PACIFIC);
        CELTICS = new NBATeam(2, "Celtics", "Boston", "BOS",
                Conference.EASTERN, Division.ATLANTIC);
    }

    @BeforeEach
    public void setup() {
        reader = mock(NBATeamReader.class);
    }

    @Test
    public void testGoodAbbreviations() {
        when(reader.getNBATeams()).thenReturn(List.of(LAKERS, CELTICS));

        GoodAbbreviations abbreviations = new GoodAbbreviations();

        List<NBATeam> expected = List.of(CELTICS);

        List<NBATeam> goodAbbreviationsTeams = abbreviations.extractGoodAbbreviationTeams(reader);
        assertEquals(expected, goodAbbreviationsTeams);
    }
}
```

## Stub Test Double

Look at the line:

`reader = mock(NBATeamReader.class);`

What we are saying here is that we want to create a **Test Double object** that has the same interface as `NBATeamReader`. This creates our mock object that we will use in this test class.

## Writing a stub with mockito

Look at the first line of our test function:

`when(reader.getNBATeams()).thenReturn(List.of(LAKERS, CELTICS));`

What does this line mean? Well, in prose, we would read it as "**When** `reader.getNBATeams()` is called, **then return** a list of the LAKERS and CELTICS teams".

In short, we are creating a stub-function here! We no longer need the heavy-weight namespace consuming class `StubNBATeamReader`.
Instead, we are creating our stub right here!

## Installing mockito

Installing mockito in a gradle project, like any other library is
simple. You can simply add:

`testImplementation group: 'org.mockito', name: 'mockito-core', version: '4.7.0'`

To your dependencies. You can, of course, use a more recent version number if you wish (at the time of this writing, 4.7.0 is the
most recent version). A note that for now we are using `mockito-core`. There are other packages like `mockito-inline` (which has some experimental features)

### Import statements

`import static org.mockito.Mockito.*;`

This gives you access to the functions in mockito we want to use.

## Top-down integration

Let's now consider that we want to integrate `GoodAbbreviations` with `NBATeamReader` and test to ensure it works. Now, instead of mocking the behavior of `NBATeamReader`, we instead mock the behavior of `BallDontLieReader`, and use the actual `NBATeamReader` class.

### Example

```java
package edu.virginia.cs.nbateams;


import org.junit.jupiter.api.*;
import org.json.*;
import java.util.*;

import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;
import static org.mockito.Mockito.*;

public class GoodAbbreviationsIntegrationTest {
    private GoodAbbreviations goodAbbreviations;
    private NBATeamReader nbaTeamReader;
    private BallDontLieReader mockBDLReader;

    private static final NBATeam CELTICS = new NBATeam(2, "Celtics", "Boston", "BOS",
            Conference.EASTERN, Division.ATLANTIC);

    @BeforeEach
    public void setup() {
        goodAbbreviations = new GoodAbbreviations();

        mockBDLReader = mock(BallDontLieReader.class);
        nbaTeamReader = new NBATeamReader(mockBDLReader);
    }

    @Test
    public void testGoodAbbreviationsFromNBATeamReader() {
        JSONObject mockJSONObject = getMockJSONObject();
        when(mockBDLReader.getAllNBATeams()).thenReturn(mockJSONObject);

        List<NBATeam> goodAbbrvTeams = goodAbbreviations.extractGoodAbbreviationTeams(nbaTeamReader);
        assertIterableEquals(goodAbbrvTeams, List.of(CELTICS));

    }

    private JSONObject getMockJSONObject() {
        String mockJSONString = """
                {
                  "data":[
                     {"id":2,"abbreviation":"BOS","city":"Boston","conference":"East","division":"Atlantic",
                             "full_name":"Boston Celtics","name":"Celtics"},
                     {"id":14,"abbreviation":"LAL","city":"Los Angeles","conference":"West","division":"Pacific",
                             "full_name":"Los Angeles Lakers","name":"Lakers"}
                    ]
                }
                """;

        JSONObject teamsJSONObject = new JSONObject(mockJSONString);
        return teamsJSONObject;

    }
}
```

While this may look like a lot, realize that `getMockJSONObject` is only used to create the mock `JSONObject` that is in the same format of a JSONObject we would expect from `BallDontLieReader`. However, from here, no mocking is done inside of the classes `NBATeamReader` or `GoodAbbreviations`. In this way, we have gone one step in a top-down integration, downwards from GoodAbbreviation (because GoodAbbreviation could itself be used by another class, this could be an example of part of a sandwich integration where `GoodAbbreviations` is the target layer).

## Wait, what about JSON?

At this point, you may notice that I haven't focused on the
external dependency of JSONObject and JSONArray. This is intentional, as we will cover JSON in later units. However, JSONObject and JSONArray are, in
effect, data structures that are not dissimilar from Maps and Lists. While we have a unit on the org.json library
later, it's worth looking at the structure of a JSON
file for now:

```json
{"professor" : {
    "name" : {
      "first" : "Paul",
      "last" : "McBurney",
      "preferred" : "Will"
    },
    "degrees" : [
      { "degree" : "BS", 
        "subject" : "Computer Science",
        "year" : 2010,
        "institution" : "West Virginia University"
      },
      { "degree" : "MS",
        "subject" : "Computer Science",
        "year" : 2012,
        "institution" : "West Virginia University",
        "advisor" : "Tim Menzies"
      },
      { "degree" : "Ph.D.",
        "subject" : "Computer Science",
        "year" : 2016,
        "institution" : "University of Notre Dame",
        "advisor" : "Collin McMillan"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

This structure, fundamentally, is a combination of Maps and Lists. For example:

* "professor" is the key to a **map** that has keys "name" and "degrees"
    * "name" is the key to a **map** that has keys:
        * "first" - value "Paul"
        * "last" - value "McBurney"
        * "preferred" - value "Will"
    * "degrees is the key to a **list** of degrees:
        * index 0 is my Bachelor's degree
        * index 1 is my Master's degree
        * index 2 is my Ph.D.

Because the JSON format is highly standardized and stable, I can
still feel comfortable using real JSON objects in testing, and
therefore the `org.json` library. There are purists who will
say we should unit-test by mocking the behavior of that library,
and there are fair reasons for that argument. For example, if
the JSON format were less well-establish and the structure of files
could change, or org.json were still new and the interfaces could change, then our tests could potentially fail because of things outside of our code. However, to me, it's fundamentally no different than testing using ArrayLists, HashMaps, or Strings.

## Mocks

A **mock** is very similar to a stub. We are creating an object like a stub object to remove the need for external dependencies. However, we still want to monitor to verify that the class interacts with external dependencies as expected For example, the class `NBATeamExcelWriter` writes to an ExcelWorkbook and saves it. Instead of actually saving the file, and then reading the saved file back-in to ensure it is correct, we can instead check to see if the file "tries" to save, but block the actual file I/O operation.

Below is an example of using mocking a class that relies heavily on an internal `Map`. One limitation of testing our classes with abstract data types is that, typically, we have to pick a concrete implementation (like `TreeMap` or `HashMap`) to do testing. This can cause problems, because it makes our test inflexible, since they are tied to specific concrete types. If the underlying concrete type used by the object changes, this could break our tests.

Consider the [`Patron` class](https://github.com/sde-coursepack/Library/blob/main/src/main/java/Patron.java) from our `Library` example below. For the sake of brevity, I only included the constructor we plan to use and method we plan to test.

```java
public class Patron {
    private final int id;
    private String firstName, lastName;
    private List<Book> booksCheckedOut;

    public Patron(int id, String firstName, String lastName, List<Book> booksCheckedOut) {
        this.id = id;
        this.firstName = firstName;
        this.lastName = lastName;
        this.booksCheckedOut = booksCheckedOut;
    }

    public void addBookToCheckedOut(Book b) {
        if (booksCheckedOut.contains(b)) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Already have copy checked out");
        }
        booksCheckedOut.add(b);
    }
}
```

In this case, we can test our method `addBookToCheckedOut` method by **mocking the List**. That's right, we can mock the abstract data type `List`, meaning we can test our class while keeping our test **independent of the concrete List implementation used.**

Here is an example of using a mocked List in [`PatronTest.java`](https://github.com/sde-coursepack/Library/blob/6dba0b86e97dd0be78fd19864b2ed2f8ba0ebdd3/src/test/java/PatronTest.java), and it will show us the same `when-then` syntax as before, as well as a new piece of Mockito syntax, `verify`:

```java
import org.junit.jupiter.api.*;
import java.util.*;
import static org.junit.jupiter.api.Assertions.*;
import static org.mockito.Mockito.*;

public class PatronTest {
    private Patron testPatron;
    private List<Book> mockList;

    private static final Book mistborn = new Book(3, "The Final Empire", "Brandon Sanderson");
    
    @SuppressWarnings("unchecked") // used because we cannot mock List<Book>, only List, which produces warning
    @BeforeEach
    public void setup() {
        mockList = mock(List.class);
        testPatron = new Patron(1, "Jane", "Doe", mockList);
    }

    @Test
    public void testCheckOutSuccessful() {
        //when you ask the mocklist if it contains Mistborn, it says "no"
        when(mockList.contains(mistborn)).thenReturn(false);

        //call the method addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn)
        testPatron.addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn);

        //verify that the mock list had add(mistborn) called on it
        verify(mockList).add(mistborn);
    }
}
```

### Mockito `verify` function

`verify` is used to verify **that a particular function, with a particular argument, was called on our `mockList` object.
This happens in our `Patron`'s `addBookToCheckedOut` when we execute:

`booksCheckedOut.add(b);`

Because `booksCheckedOut` in our `testPatron` instance **is** the same as `mockList`, and `b` is the same book as `mistborn` in our function call, this line does the same thing as saying:

`mockList.add(mistborn)`

This means, because we *did* have our test try to add `mistborn` to `mockList`, we can say that the function behaved *as expected.* Now, this may look odd, as we have a test with no explicit `assert` statements. You may even think we should check to make sure `booksCheckedOut` is in the state it should be. However, remember, **we don't have a real list**. This is a mock list. However, the simple fact that the method tried to add `mistborn` to the mocked `checkOutBookList` is sufficient for our testing purposes.

### Purpose of `verify`

In the same way we have used `assert` to check *post-conditions* on our function output and test objects in the past, we use `verify` to to check the post-conditions for **mocked objects**. This is because *mocked objects do not have any real behavior.* We cannot expect the mock object to behave correctly, since the entire point of mocking is to **separate the method-under-test from the external dependency**. 

For a second example, let's now consider the false case:

```java
    @Test
    public void testCheckOutFailure_alreadyHaveBook() {
        //when you ask the mocklist if it contains Mistborn, it says "yes"
        when(mockList.contains(mistborn)).thenReturn(true);

        //call the method addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn), should get exception
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class, () ->
                testPatron.addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn));

        //verify that the mock list has never had add(mistborn) called on it
        verify(mockList, times(0)).add(mistborn);
    }
```

In this case, we use our old friend `assertThrows` to ensure the method throws an exception. However, we also want to `verify` that we have tried to add `mistborn` to our `mockList` zero times. The `times(0)` argument is useful for saying how many times a function should have been called. If we don't include a `times` argument, then it defaults to `times(1)` - that is, we call the function exactly one time. In the same way, you can use `times(2)`, `times(x)` where x is an int, etc.

Another way we could write this test is to say that, after our call to `contains`, **nothing should happen to this list at all**. This is the same test, but with our last statement changed.

```java
    @Test
    public void testCheckOutFailure_alreadyHaveBook() {
        //when you ask the mocklist if it contains Mistborn, it says "yes"
        when(mockList.contains(mistborn)).thenReturn(true);

        //call the method addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn), should get exception
        assertThrows(IllegalArgumentException.class, () ->
        testPatron.addBookToCheckedOut(mistborn));

        //verify that the mock list has never had add(mistborn) called on it
        verify(mockList).contains(mistborn);
        verifyNoMoreInteractions(mockList);
    }
```

`verifyNoMoreInteractions` means that no methods, other than the ones we have called `verify` with, have been called. In this case, we have to include `contains` since we did use it in the if-statement in Patron.

Be aware, however, the test above is quite **brittle** - that is, an underlying change to the code that doesn't change the *functionality* of the method, but calls different functions on the mock object *could* result in the test failing, even if the post-conditions of the test fail. As such, generally, I would recommend *against* using `verifyNoMoreInteractions`, but it is a tool worth being aware of.

### `verify` vs. `assert` methods

When we are testing return values of the *method-under-test* (when present) and post-conditions of test objects, we always want to use `assert` methods like `assertEquals`.

We only use `verify` to ensure the intended *destructive* functions (that is, functions that could produce side-effects on the external dependency) are called. For instance, where in the tests above we used...

`verify(mockList).add(mistborn);`

...we don't care *how* `mistborn` is added to the list, and we aren't asserting the list now contains `mistborn`. Because that behavior **is dependent upon an external class.** We only care that we interacted with the correct interface method that *should* add `mistborn` to the list. The point is that this List is unit tested elsewhere, and we only want **this** test to fail if the fault is with **our** code in the method-under-test, not due to incorrect behavior in another class.

In short, *verify is simply ensuring that the intended interaction is invoked*. We don't check if that interaction produces a correct outcome because, remember, **this is not a real List!** This is a *mock* of a List! It doesn't *have* any real behavior!




## Why use test Doubles

You might right now be thinking that this is a lot of extra work, why not just do integration tests? After all, if the larger parts work, then the small parts must work, right?

**Remember**: debugging a little code is significantly easier than debugging a lot of code! Using Stubs like this allows us to dramatically shrink the code we are looking at! We can even use this to customize our level of integration.

Yes, this does take more code, but this isn't a problem. In fact, it's important to understand that "less code" does not mean "less work", as proper testing can drastically reduce our overall debugging work. The "code" of our stub is trivially easy to write, and it ensures that our test of `extractGoodAbbreviationTeams` is **stable** and **portable**. This test no longer relies on other classes working, no longer relies on the internet, and no longer relies on an external server. Additionally, even if our **implementation** of the class `NBATeamReader` changes, so long as the **interface** remains the same, this test will still work!

