---
Title: FXML and SceneBuilder
---

* TOC
{:toc}

This page is under construction.

# Scenebuilder and FXML

Imagine you were building a complicated GUI application, which had several scenes, controls, layouts, etc. While it is possible to build those applications at the code level, it would be difficult and time-consuming, especially because you wouldn't have a clear visualization of how your app looked until you ran it.

A tool that can help is [Gluon's SceneBuilder](https://gluonhq.com/products/scene-builder/) - this application gives you a "drag and drop" interface for creating application layouts and visuals. 

## SceneBuilder in Intellij
It's worth noting that this tool *is* accessible within IntelliJ, but you must first install SceneBuilder on your computer. When installing, make note of **where** SceneBuilder is installed, as you will need it:

Set your SceneBuilder install folder in IntelliJ by going to:

File -> Settings -> Languages and Frameworks -> JavaFX

And then fill in the path where SceneBuilder was installed (or you can use Browse to find it's install location). Specifically, you want the SceneBuilder.exe file

### Word of caution

A note that I have found SceneBuilder within IntelliJ to sometimes be a bit unstable. Most of the time it works fine, but every now and then, it freezes up or starts producing unintended behavior. Additionally, I've seen several students say they have issues getting SceneBuilder to work at all inside of IntelliJ In those cases, you can close all .fxml files (which is what SceneBuilder edits) and restart IntelliJ. You can also simply use SceneBuilder as a standalone application outside of IntelliJ, and I've not seen any problems.

## Using SceneBuilder

## FXML Files

### Understanding SceneBuilder to FXML
