---
Title: SOLID
---

* TOC
{:toc}

# SOLID

SOLID is an acronym for five Object-Oriented Design Principles.

* S - Single Responsibility Principle
* O - Open-Closed Principle
* L - Liskov Substitution Principle
* I - Interface Segregation Principle
* D - Dependency Inversion Principle

We will go through each and show examples of what a violation looks like, as well as how to correct that violation. At core here is that you will need a solid understanding of polymorphism in Java to understand the code snippets used.

Be aware that the code shown here is intentionally incomplete. The goal is to show *just enough code* for you to understand the principle at play.

## Single Responsibility Principle

__Each software module should have one, and only one, reason to change__

Consider the following partial class with some selected methods entered:

```java
public class Student {
    private String firstName, lastName, email;
    private List<Course> currentCourses;
    private List<CourseRecord> courseGrades;
    private boolean isTA;
    private Course courseTA;
    private double currentWeeklyHours;
    
    public double generateTranscriptDocument() {
        // does something with courseGrades;
    }
    
    public void semesterReset() {
        currentCourses.clear();
        isTA = false;
        courseTA = null;
        currentWeeklyHours = 0;
    }
    
    public void uploadFinalGrade(Grade grade, Course c) {
        CourseRecord courseRecord = new CourseRecord(c, grade);
        courseGrades.add(courseRecord);
    }
    
    public double calculateGPA() {
        // iterate through courseRecord
    }
    
    public double calculatePay(double hourlyRate) {
        return currentWeeklyHours * hourlyRate;
    }
}
```

This class feels awkward, like it is doing too much. That's because it is! Think of what *human-beings* using the software are *using this class for*:

- __Registrar__ - the registrar will want to `generateTranscriptDocument`
- __Professor__ - the professor will want to `uploadFinalGrade`
- __HR__ - HR will want to use `calculatePay`

Think of the reasons, however, that this class could change:

1. `__generateTranscriptDocument__` may need to change if the printed format changes.
2. `__uploadFinalGrade__` and `__calculateGPA__` may need to change if the available grades change (as they did during Covid with the addition of `CR`, `GC`, and `NC` grades)
3. `__calculatePay__` and fields about TAing may need to change if TAs are moved to a salaried position or may need to work differently if the student is a graduate student.

In short, there's a lot of different reasons this class can change. This means that this class is violating the Single Responsibility Principle. As a hint, the *use-case* of each of the roles mentioned describes a *functional module*. Using that, we can break this class up:

```java
public class Student {
    ...
}

public class GPACalculator {
    public double calculateGPA(Student student);
}

public class Transcript {
    public void generateTranscript(Student student);
}

public class TAPayment {
    public double calculatePay(Student student);
}
```

Now, each of these classes has one responsibility. Yes, each of these classes is heavily dependent on Student, but that was still the case when they were all in one class. The key, however, is that if the software engineer receives a request to change a feature *related to GPA calculation*, they now know the primary class that they are working from. And because GPACalculation is *encapsulated* from Student, the developer for GPACalculator is significantly less likely to make changes that could break the other two *use-cases*.

Note that we probably *should* decompose this further. For instance, it probably would make sense to separate keeping track of the students current courses, from keeping track of their course history, from keeping track of their TA hours. But this is meant to just be a starting point.


## Open-Closed Principle

__A software artifact should be open for extension, but closed for modifications__

This means that, whenever possible, we want to avoid changing existing module code that
1. is working
2. is well tested and
3. has other modules dependent on it.

Thus, instead of changing existing code, we can **extend** it: that is extend the behavior and interface to another class that handles the new feature needs.

Considering our `Student` class again, what if our software receives a request from HR that we need to change how calculatePay is handled for **graduate students**. To that end, you decide to update the student class:

```java

public class Student {
    private boolean isGradStudent();
    
    public boolean isGradStudent() {
        return isGradStudent();
    }
    
    public PayInformation getUndergradPayInformation() { 
        if (isGradStudent()) {
            throw new RuntimeException();
        }
        ...
    }

    public PayInformation getGraduatePayInformation() {
        if (!isGradStudent()) {
            throw new RuntimeException();
        }
        ...
    }
}
```

and the `CalculatePay` class:
```java
public class TAPayment {
    public double calculatePay(Student student) {
        if(student.isGradStudent()) {
            return calculateGradStudentPay(student);
        } else {
            return calculateUndergradStudentPay(student);
        }
    }
    
    public double calculateGradStudentPay(Student student) {
        PayInformation info = student.getGraduatePayInformation();
        return processPayInformationAndGetWages(info);
    }
    
    public double calculateUndergradStudentPay(Student student) {
        PayInformation info = student.getUndergradPayInformation();
        return processPayInformationAndGetWages(info);
    }
}
```


Of course, you'll similarly need to update the `constructor` for `Student` to allow to specify a GraduateStudent, or at minimum add a function. But now HR tells you that if a student is a grad student, you'll need methods to specify a professor as a PI who pays the students stipend and tuition waiver. So now you're adding a whole slew of fields to the `Student` class that only affect some students. And your changing existing methods and adding new methods in TAPayment. That means whatever class **uses** TAPayment will also be affected.

At this point, you should consider the Open-Closed Principle. Rather than **modifying** the `Student` class, it may make sense to **extend it**, or at minimum extend its abstraction. For example:

```java
public abstract class Student {
    public abstract PayInformation getPayInformation();
}

public abstract class UndergradStudent extends Student {
    @Override
    public PayInformation getPayInformation() {
        ...
    }
}

public abstract class GraduateStudent extends Student {
    @Override
    public PayInformation getPayInformation() {
        ...
    }
}
```

Now, we can still define `TAPayment` with:

```java
public class TAPayment {
    public double calculatePay(Student student) {
        PayInformation info = student.getPayInformation();
        return processPayInformationAndGetWages(info);
    }
    ...
}
```

In this way, the correct function is called, but without needing `if` statements and without `TAPayment` needing to explicitly handle `GraduateStudent` and `UndergradStudent` differently. This is also advantageous, as it sets us up later to add classes like `PartTimeStudent` as needed.

## Liscov Substitution Principle

__All subclasses should be substitutable for their base or parent class__

The above means that "a child should, externally, appear to behave the same as the parent." That is, every single behavior the parent class has must be inherited by the child.

Consider an idea where HR informs you that, going forward, you can hire non-students (such as local software developers) as TAs for your course. Obviously, this isn't likely to happen for a number of reasons. As so, you add a new extension, `ExternalTA` for public class `Student`. Remember, however, `Student` needs to interface with `Transcript` and `GPACalculator`, which our non-students won't have. You *could* write something like:

```java
public class ProfessionalTA extends Student {
    @Override
    public PayInformation getPayInformation() {
        ...
    }
    
    //used by Transcript
    @Override
    public TranscriptData getTranscriptData() { 
        throw new UnsupportedOperationException("ProfessionalTA has no course history");
    }

    //used by GPACalculator
    @Override
    public List<CourseRecord> getCourseHistory() {
        throw new UnsupportedOperationException("ProfessionalTA has no course history");
    }
}
```

...but this is a bad idea. Because now, for a change that should only affect the `TAPayment` class, I now will have to add to the other two classes that use the `Student` interface, `GPACalculator` and `Transcript`. For example, `Transcript` may now need to have to change from something like:

```java
public class Transcript {
    public void generateTranscript(Student student) {
        TranscriptData data = student.getTranscriptData();
    }
}
```

... to something like ...

```java
public class Transcript {
    public void generateTranscript(Student student) {
        if (student instanceof ProfessionalTA) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("Non-student - "  + student);
        }
        TranscriptData data = student.getTranscriptData();
    }
}
```

That is, **a change to a feature completely unrelated to `Transcript` forces us to modify `Transcript`**

To fix this problem, we can instead separate the interface for a `TA` to a separate interface. For example, we make the following changes:

```java
public interface TA {
    public PayInformation getPayInformation();
}

public abstract class Student implements TA {
    public abstract PayInformation getPayInformation();
}

public class ProfessionalTA implements TA {
    @Override
    public PayInformation getPayInformation() {
        ...
    }
}

public class TAPayment {
    public double calculatePay(TA ta) {
        PayInformation info = ta.getPayInformation();
        return processPayInformationAndGetWages(info);
    }
    ...
}
```

Specifically, notice now that `TAPayment` no longer uses `Student`, but instead uses `TA`. Because `Student` implements `TA`, we still have the relationship where all students also implement the needed `TA` behavior. Additionally, `ProfessionalTA` implements `TA`, so it can still be used by `TAPayment`, but cannot be mistaken for a `Student` by `GPACalculator` and `Transcript`.

Now, we no longer have to worry about changes to `TAPayment` or the `TA` interface influencing `GPACalculator` and `Transcript`.

Note that the reason I use an interface instead of an abstract class is because I am adding a single behavior to a class that otherwise might have a purpose (like `Student`). Abstract classes generally imply a strict hierarchy, and each class can only extend one abstract class. However, we can always implement multiple interfaces.

## Interface Segregation Principle

__A client should never be forced to depend on an interface they do not use__

Specifically, a module should only be dependent upon interfaces it needs. In order to ensure this, we should not group unlike behaviors into the same interface. We have actually already demonstrated the Interface Segregation Principle as well. Specifically, we separated the interface `TA` from the interface of the abstract class `Student`, as the two interfaces were not related to one another in any meaningful way.

In general, what this means is if we wish to add a new feature to a class that is unrelated to any interfaces it currently extends, we should **not** add the new feature to the existing interface. For example:

```java
public interface Notifiable {
    public void notify(String message);
}
```

In this case, `Student`s can be notified, but so can `Professor`s. As such, rather than force this behavior into the existing `Student` interface, we simply define it as a separate interface and add it to all the classes we want to support that behavior.

```java
public class Professor extends Notifiable {
    ...
    @Override
    public void notify(String message) {
        Email notification = new Email(this.email, message);
        email.send();
    }
}

public abstract class Student extends Notifiable {
    ...
    @Override
    public void notify(String message) {
        ContactMethod method = this.getPreferredContactMethod();
        method.notify(this.contactInformation);
    }
}

```

And now any class or methods that sends notifications can simply use the `Notifiable` interface name.

```java
public class EmergencyNotice {
    private UniversityRoster universityRoster;
    
    ...
    
    public notifyAll(String message) {
        List<Notifiable> toBeNotified = new ArrayList<>();
        toBeNotified.addAll(universityRoster.getAllProfessors());
        toBeNotified.addAll(universityRoster.getAllStudents());
        toBeNotified.stream().forEach(x -> x.notify(message));
    }
}
```

But we do this without polluting or changing the existing unrelated `Student` abstract class, or trying to force the `Student` abstract interface on to our `Professor` class.


## Dependency Inversion

__Entities should only depend on abstractions, not on concretions.__

What this means is that in general, we want our entities to depend on Abstract behaviors, not on concrete implementations, when possible. 

For example, rather than:

```java
public class HumanResources {
    public void payUndergradTA(UndergradStudent underGrad) {
        TAPayment payment = new TAPayment();
        double payAmount = payment.calculatePay(underGrad);
        dispersePayment(underGrad, amount);
    }

    public void payUndergradTA(GraduateStudent grad) {
        TAPayment payment = new TAPayment();
        double payAmount = payment.calculatePay(grad);
        dispersePayment(grad, amount);
    }
    ...

    public void payUndergradTA(ProfessionalTA proTA) {
        TAPayment payment = new TAPayment();
        double payAmount = payment.calculatePay(proTA);
        dispersePayment(proTA, amount);
    }
    ...
}
```

In this case, `HumanResources` **is dependent upon** `UndergradStudent`, `GraduateStudent` and `ProfessionalTA`. Because of this dependency, changes to any of those classes could propogate to `HumanResources`. Instead, we should interact only with the abstraction when possible...

```java
public class HumanResources {
    public void payTA(TA ta) {
        TAPayment payment = new TAPayment();
        double payAmount = payment.calculatePay(ta);
        dispersePayment(ta, amount);
    }
}
```
    
The key of the dependency-inversion is that HumanResources **is no longer aware** of any concrete implementation information. It is only dependent on the interface `TA`. The advantage of this is that, so long as the interface `TA` is stable, `HumanResources`, `Student`, `UndergradStudent`, `GraduateStudent`, and `ProfessionalTA` can all be **independently modified**. For example, changes to the implementation of `UndergradStudent` will not necessitate any changes to any other class provided that `UndergradStudent` continues to implement the interface `TA`. Further, any **new** types of `TA` we create will not necessitate any changes to `HumanResources` or `TAPayment`, so long as it implements the `TA` interface.

In this way, `HumanResources` now depends on the interface `TA`. Additionally, `UndergradStudent`, `GradStudent`, and `ProfessionalTA` are bound to the interface `TA`, dependent upon implementing it. This is a **dependency-inversion**, as by simply adding an abstraction between `HumanResources` and our concrete `TA` implementors, we have removed the dependency from `HumanResources` to the concrete implementors completely.

