---
Title: Classes
---

# Classes in Java
{: .no_toc }

Java is built around **object-oriented programming**. Object-oriented programming is built on the idea of representing collections of data as "objects" to be interacted with. Similar objects are described by a single class.

In this module, we'll show some examples for how to create and use a Java class.

---

## Contents
{: .no_toc }

* TOC
{:toc}

---


**_Note:_** This unit covers *pre-requisite material* for CS 3140, and should already be understood by students before taking CS 3140. However, because of the heavy emphasis on Object-Oriented Programming on CS 3140, this material is included in the online textbook.


## Class

A class is a description of how a particular "type" (or *classification*) of objects are interacted with and behave. In Java, we write a Java *class* as a .java file. This .java file describes the data and methods the class has, as well as defining constructors for **instantiating** objects. It's important to remember that a **class** is a pattern, or blueprint, used to describe a **classification** of objects, but is not itself and object.

In Java, when we create a class, we are defining our own *data type*. In the same way we can create `String` and `ArrayList` objects in Java, we can create objects of our own custom data type.

### Parts of a class

Example: the following shows a partial example of a simple *class* for modeling Pez Dispensers:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    //fields
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    //constructor
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity) {
        this.characterName = characterName;
        this.capacity = capacity;
        this.count = 0;
    }
    
    //methods
    public void load() {
        count = capacity;
    }
    
    public boolean dispense() {
        if (count == 0) {
            return false;
        }
        count--;
        return true;
    }
}
```

Here, we see a field for storing the name of the character (`characterName`) of the PezDispenser. We also see fields for tracking the maximum number of candies in the PezDispenser (`capacity`) and the current number of candies (`count`).

However, without creating an **instance** of a Pez Dispenser, we cannot interact with this code.

## Instance

An **instance** is a particular example of a class. For example, if I bought 3 Pez Dispensers, I would have 3 **instances** of the class PezDispenser.

In a well-designed class, **instances** of the same **class**:
1) Each have their own **state**, separate from other **instances**
2) Share the same **behavior** with other **instances**

### Constructors

**Constructors** are special methods used to create **instances** of a class. For example, in the above `PezDispenser` class, the constructor is:

```java
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity) {
        this.characterName = characterName;
        this.capacity = capacity;
        this.count = 0;
    }
```

This method is invoked in a special way. For example, let's say I wanted to make a Superman Pez Dispenser with a capacity of 12. I would, in the code that uses the PezDispenser class, write:

```java
public class PezDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        PezDispenser superman = new PezDispenser("Superman", 12);
        ...//do something with superman
    }
}
```

Now we have an *instance* of the *class* PezDispenser, referenced by the variable `superman`. If we also wanted a second, Batman Pez Dispenser, we could augment this code:

```java
public class PezDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        PezDispenser superman = new PezDispenser("Superman", 12);
        PezDispenser batman = new PezDispenser("Batman", 12);
        ...//do something with superman and Batman
    }
}
```

This gives us two separate instances.

## State

The *state* of an object is the description of the current status of an *instance* (not a class!). In this way, all *instances* have their own state. Typically, the *state* of an object is described that the value of its fields.

### Fields

In the above class, the fields of the class PezDispenser are:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    ...
}
```

Note that it is *not* required to list all fields at the top of the class. However, it is convention to do so. Following this convention ensures that classes are more easily readable and predictable.

The *state* of the two instances are as follows:

* `superman` - `characterName = "Superman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 0`
* `batman`  - `characterName = "Batman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 0`

Think of each of these objects as having a set of their own 3 variables, one `String` and two `int`s. Technically, for both objects capacity is not a variable but a `final`, or **immutable** value, but the key is that both values of `capacity` are stored in separate *memory locations*.

## Behaviors

While each *instance* of a class has its own state, the *instances* share the same **behavior**. For example, the way that I `load` or `dispense` from a Superman Pez Dispenser is going to be the same as the way I `load` and `dispense` a Batman PezDispenser.

### Methods

Typically, behaviors of a class are described by their **methods** (non-static functions). In the above class, the fields of the class PezDispenser are:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    ... 
    
    public void load() {
        count = capacity;
    }

    public boolean dispense() {
        if (count == 0) {
            return false;
        }
        count--;
        return true;
    }
}
```

These methods describe the two *behaviors* we can do on a Pez Dispenser. That is, we can load or dispense from a Pez Dispenser. These methods are invoked by **calling the method on a specific instance** using the **dot operator**. For example:

```java
public class PezDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        PezDispenser superman = new PezDispenser("Superman", 12);
        PezDispenser batman = new PezDispenser("Batman", 12);
        superman.load();
        ...
    }
}
```

In the last line of this method, `superman.load();`, we are saying:

**Call the load method on the `superman` instance of PezDispenser**. 

**Before** we call this method, are values are:

* `superman` - `characterName = "Superman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 0`
* `batman`  - `characterName = "Batman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 0`

However, **after** calling `superman.load()`, the values of our two instances are:

* `superman` - `characterName = "Superman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 12`
* `batman`  - `characterName = "Batman"`, `capacity = 12`, `count = 0`

You'll notice that only the value of `count` for `superman` changed. The value of `count` for `batman` did not change, because we didn't act on the `batman` instance. This is because both instances have a separate **state**. And while we changed the state of `superman`, we did not change the state of `batman`.

However, if we also wanted to load the `batman` Pez Dispenser, it would be as simple as calling `batman.load()`. That is, invoking the **same** behavior on the **different** instance.

## Encapsulation

**Why is this useful?**

The key benefit of the tools we looked at so far is **encapsulation**. That is, separating *how something is used* from how it works. And we interact with the idea of encapsulation all the time!

For example, if you want to use a toaster, you plug it in, add bread and push down the lever. You don't have to think about:
* What is the resistance on the coils that superheat to toast the bread?
* What is the power draw of the toaster from the wall?
* What type of wires are necessary to ensure the toaster is safe to use for it's given power draw?
* How is the plug manufactured and attached to the toaster?
* How is does the system know when the lever is pushed down vs. when it isn't pushed down?
* How is the time kept so that the toast pops up at the right time?

You don't have to answer these questions, but whoever designed and built the toaster did! These questions have answer, but you don't need them to use the toaster.

This is valuable in design because it allows us to create classes that are *simple to use*, and hides any implementation details from the user.

### Public and Private

In this way, we *want* to ensure that the user of a class only interacts with classes in intended ways. For example, you may notice that I made all three fields of Pez Dispenser `private`, but I made the methods `public`. These values describe how encapsulation will be enforced. Specifically:

* `public` - this field/method/constructor can be accessed via any other class in a given project
  * For example, PezDemo, which is outside the PezDispenser class, can call the public methods and the constructor on PezDispenser
* `private` - this field is **hidden** from all other classes in a given project. For example, PezDemo **cannot** access the fields in the class directly. This means that PezDemo can only set the value of `count` through usages of the `load` and `dispense` methods.

This limitation is a good thing, because it prevents the `PezDispenser` object from being used incorrectly. For example, if we had `count` as `public`, wwe could modify it directly, with something like:

```java
public class PezDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        PezDispenser superman = new PezDispenser("Superman", 12);
        PezDispenser batman = new PezDispenser("Batman", 12);
        superman.load();
        batman.count = 7;
        ...
    }
}
```

While this may seem convenient, the problem is that it allows a client (someone using the class) to perform meaningless and incorrect operations.

```java
public class PezDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        PezDispenser batman = new PezDispenser("Batman", 12);
        batman.count = 99;
        batman.load();
    }
}
```

In the above case, we set the Batman PezDispensers `count` value to 99, which is **much** larger than the capacity. Then, when we `load` the PezDispenser, it results in `count` *decreasing* to 12. This weird behavior could cause confusion or a bug down the line.

As such, by making `count` be `private`, it becomes syntatically illegal to use `batman.count` (or `superman.count`), as the field is hidden.

## Other Class Content

The following units cover common programming tools/techniques for creating classes and using objects.

### Getters and setters

Of course, we may still want to see what the value of `count` is, or we may want to allow the client to set the value of `count`, but within certain parameters (i.e., between 0 and `capacity` inclusive).

### Overloaded Constructors

You can have multiple constructor methods for a single class. For example, with our `PezDispenser` class, we could have a secondary constructor that defaults the value of capacity to `12`:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    //fields
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    //constructor
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity) {
        this.characterName = characterName;
        this.capacity = capacity;
        this.count = 0;
    }
    
    public PezDispenser(String characterName) {
      this.characterName = characterName;
      this.capacity = 12;
      this.count = 0;
    }
    
    ...
}
```

Additionally, if we wanted to make PezDispensers that we can set the initial count value, we could add a three argument constructor:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    //fields
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    //constructor
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity, int count) {
        if (capacity < count || count < 0) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("count must be non-negative and no greater than capacity");
        }
        this.characterName = characterName;
        this.capacity = capacity;
        this.count = count;
    }
    ...
```

Here, we have to handle some basic error checking to ensure that the value of count makes sense given the capacity.

But...this is all very redundant, yes? Three constructors that are nearly identical, and simply set default values in two of them. As such, we can shorten these three constructors using the `this` constructor:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    //fields
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    public static final int DEFAULT_CAPACITY = 12;
    public static final int DEFAULT_COUNT = 0;
    
    //constructor
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity, int count) {
        if (capacity < count || count < 0) {
            throw new IllegalArgumentException("count must be non-negative and no greater than capacity");
        }
        this.characterName = characterName;
        this.capacity = capacity;
        this.count = count;
    }
    
    public PezDispenser(String characterName, int capacity) {
        this(characterName, capacity, DEFAULT_COUNT);
    }
    
    public PezDispenser(String characterName) {
        this(characterName, DEFAULT_CAPACITY, DEFAULT_COUNT);
    }
    
    ...
}
```

Here, we have one *primary* constructor, and two constructors that simply pass the inputs (along with any default values) to the primary constructor. In this way, we are still only setting the initial field values in one constructor, but allowing the flexibility to call the constructor with different numbers of arguments, depending on what the user needs. Be aware that when using the `this` constructor in this way, the `this` call *must be the first line of the constructor*.

### Destructive vs. non-destructive methods

Some methods in objects may be either *destructive* or *non-destructive*. A *destructive* method is one that, when the method is called, *could* result in the state of the object changing. For example, the `PezDispenser` methods `load` and `dispense` are *destructive* methods. Note that we call `dispense` destructive even if a particular call (namely, when count is already equal to zero) would not result in the object changing. In general, setter methods are always considered destructive (since that is the point of a setter).

Non-destructive methods are methods that do not change the state of the object they are called on. Typically, methods like `toString` and `hashCode` should always be non-destructive, as should getter methods. In some classes, there will be **no destructive methods** at all! For example, the Java `String` class has no destructive methods. This is because the contents of a String are `final`, or **immutable**, meaning they can't be changed. Take for example the following code:

```java
    String s = "Hello World!";
    s.toUppercase();
    System.out.println(s);
```

What would you expect to print here? Well, you might think what will print is `HELLO WORLD!`, but you would be incorrect! While the method `toUppercase` *returns* the `String` `"HELLO WORLD"`, it doesn't *change* the value of `s`. That's because the existing `String s` **cannot be changed** after it is created. If you want to change the `String s` to be all uppercase, you would have to reassign the variable s to a new String.

```java
    String s = "Hello World!";
    s = s.toUppercase(); //reassign the value of s
    System.out.println(s);
```

The important difference here is that the `String` variable `s` is now actually referencing to a different String entirely. That is, the new String `"HELLO WORLD"` is stored in memory in a completely different location than the old String `"Hello World"`. As a note, after this code executes, the old String location will eventually be released back to memory to be reallocated as needed.

## Java keywords related to classes

There are a few Java keywords worth mentioning as it relates to class construction.

### Static vs. non-static

Unless explicitly stated to be `static`, all methods are **non-static**. For example, everything, except the constants we created (`DEFAULT_CAPACITY` and `DEFAULT_COUNT`) is *non-static*. So what does that mean?

* __non-static__ - belongs to a specific *instance* of a class.
* __static__ - belongs to the class as a whole.

As an example, consider the following small Java class:

```java
public class Example {
  private int x;
  private static int sum = 0;

  public Example(int x) {
    this.x = x;
    sum += x;
  }

  public int getX() {
    return x;
  }
  
  public static int getSum() {
      return sum;
  }
}
```

Let's say we run the following code:

```java
public class ExampleDemo {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        Example example1 = new Example(1);
        Example example2 = new Example(2);
        Example example3 = new Example(3);
        System.out.println(Example.getSum());
    }
}
```

The above code will print 6. That's because whenever we create a new instance of Example, we are adding *that* Example object's `x` value to `sum`. Additionally, note that when we call `getSum`, we *aren't using an instance of `Example`*, but rather we are calling getSum on the *class* Example. This is what we mean by a static method not belonging to any one instance. It can be invoked by the class name. There are a number of static methods you have like used before:

```java
  Math.sqrt(5);
  Integer.parseInt(input);
  Arrays.toString(myArray);
  Collections.sort(myList);
```

Here, we are calling the method we want on the class. We don't make an instance of the classes `Math`, `Integer`, `Arrays`, or `Collections`.

By contrast, non-static method calls will look like:

```java
  String s = myString.toUpperCase();
  String input = scanner.nextLine();
  myList.sort();
  superman.load();
```

Here, we are calling methods *on an instance of a class*, specifically an instance of `String`, `Scanner`, `List`, and `PezDispenser`.

When in doubt, you should generally make your methods non-static. This is especially true if you are create a datatype that you are going to use multiple times in your program.

### Mutability and `final`

By default, every variable you create in Java is *mutable*, which means "it can change". However, when we create objects, there may be variables that we don't want to change. The `final` keyword gives us a syntactic way to make a variable **immutable**.

For instance, consider our PezDispenser fields:

```java
public class PezDispenser {
    //fields
    private String characterName;
    private final int capacity;
    private int count;
    
    ...
}
```

You'll notice that the variable `capacity` is `final`. What this means is that, after the constructor is completed, the value of capacity *can never be changed*. That is, the value of `capacity` is **immutable**. On the other hand, `count` is not stated as `final`, and is able to change. In fact, it's necessary for count *to* be able to change in order to mimic the behavior of a PezDispenser (since loading and dispensing from a Pez Dispenser changes the number of candies inside).

It's worth noting that I left `characterName` as mutable. Do I have a good reason for this? Not really! And, as Brian Goetz states:

>“Just as it is a good practice to make all fields private unless they need greater visibility, it is a good practice to make all fields final unless they need to be mutable.”
> -― Brian Goetz, Java Concurrency in Practice

In this case, it would make sense for me to make `characterName` `final` **unless** I am envisioning something like a PezDispenser where you can change the character head on top. If I *do* want to be able to change the character head on top, then I wouldn't make the value `final`.

Note that when a value is `final`, we cannot have a `setter` method to modify it, since modifying a final variable outside of the constructor is explicitly prohibited.